README.md, before:

# Clicycle

[![CI](https://github.com/Living-Content/clicycle/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Living-Content/clicycle/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Living-Content/clicycle/graph/badge.svg?token=YOUR_TOKEN)](https://codecov.io/gh/Living-Content/clicycle)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/clicycle)](https://pypi.org/project/clicycle/)
[![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%20%7C%203.12-blue)](https://pypi.org/project/clicycle/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

> Component-based CLI rendering with automatic spacing and Rich styling

**Clicycle** makes beautiful CLIs easy by treating terminal output as composable components.

## Installation

```bash
pip install clicycle
```

## Quick Start

```python
import clicycle as cc
import time

# Display header
cc.header("My App", "v2.0.0")

# Show messages
cc.info("Starting process...")

# Use a spinner
with cc.spinner("Processing..."):
    time.sleep(2)

cc.success("Complete!")
```

## API Reference

### Display Functions

```python
# Text messages
cc.info("Information message")
cc.success("Operation successful")
cc.error("Something went wrong") 
cc.warning("Be careful")
cc.list_item("Bullet point")

# Structure
cc.header("Title", "Subtitle", "App Name")
cc.section("Section Name")

# Data display
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Age": 30}], title="Users")
cc.table(data, column_widths={"ID": 40, "Name": 20}, wrap_text=False)
cc.code("print('hello')", language="python", title="Example")
cc.json({"key": "value"}, title="Config")

# Progress indicators (context managers)
with cc.spinner("Loading..."):
    # Your code here
    pass

with cc.progress("Processing") as prog:
    for i in range(100):
        prog.update(i, f"Item {i}")

# Multi-task progress tracking
with cc.multi_progress("Processing tasks") as progress:
    task1 = progress.add_task("Download", total=100)
    task2 = progress.add_task("Process", total=100)
    
    for i in range(100):
        progress.update(task1, advance=1)
        progress.update(task2, advance=1)

# Interactive components (with automatic fallback)
selected = cc.select("Choose an option", ["Option 1", "Option 2", "Option 3"])
selected_many = cc.multi_select("Select features", ["Auth", "API", "Cache", "Queue"])

# Group components without spacing
with cc.group():
    cc.info("These lines")
    cc.success("appear together")
    cc.warning("without spacing")
```

### Table Options

The `table` function supports advanced formatting options:

```python
# Basic table
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Age": 30}])

# Table with title
cc.table(data, title="User List")

# Table with custom column widths (in characters)
cc.table(data, column_widths={"ID": 40, "Name": 20, "Description": 60})

# Table with text wrapping control
cc.table(data, wrap_text=True)   # Allow text wrapping (default)
cc.table(data, wrap_text=False)  # Use ellipsis for long text

# Combined options
cc.table(
    data,
    title="Project Status",
    column_widths={"Project ID": 40, "Status": 15},
    wrap_text=False
)
```

### Configuration

```python
# Configure the default instance
cc.configure(
    width=100,
    theme=cc.Theme(
        disappearing_spinners=True,  # Spinners vanish when done
        spinner_type="dots2"         # Rich spinner style
    ),
    app_name="MyApp"
)

# Direct access
cc.console.print("Rich console access")
cc.theme.icons.success = "✅"
cc.clear()  # Clear screen
```

## Debug Messages and Logging

For debug messages, use Python's standard logging module:

```python
import logging

# Configure logging level based on command line flag
if '--debug' in sys.argv:
    logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)
else:
    logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

# Use standard logging for debug messages
logger.debug("This only appears when logging level is DEBUG")
cc.info("This always appears")
```

## Themes

Create custom themes to control appearance:

```python
from clicycle import Theme, Icons, Typography

theme = Theme(
    # Custom icons
    icons=Icons(
        success="✅",
        error="❌",
        warning="⚠️",
        info="ℹ️",
    ),
    
    # Custom styles (Rich format)
    typography=Typography(
        header_style="bold cyan",
        success_style="bold green",
        error_style="bold red",
    ),
    
    # Spinner configuration
    disappearing_spinners=True,
    spinner_type="dots2"  # dots, line, star, etc.
)

cc.configure(theme=theme)
```

## Component Architecture

For advanced use cases, work directly with components:

```python
from clicycle import Clicycle
from clicycle.components.header import Header
from clicycle.components.spinner import Spinner

# Create instance
cli = Clicycle()

# Render components
cli.stream.render(Header(cli.theme, "Title"))

# Components manage their own spacing
spinner = Spinner(cli.theme, "Loading...", cli.console)
cli.stream.render(spinner)
with spinner:
    # Your code
    pass
```

## Key Features

- **Automatic Spacing**: Components intelligently manage spacing based on context
- **Disappearing Spinners**: Spinners that completely vanish after completion
- **Interactive Components**: Arrow-key navigation with automatic fallback
- **Rich Integration**: Full support for Rich styling and formatting  
- **Component Discovery**: Convenience API automatically discovers all components
- **Type Safe**: Full type hints for IDE support

## Interactive Components

Clicycle provides smooth, responsive interactive components with vertical arrow-key navigation:

### Select Menu

```python
# Simple selection
choice = cc.select("Choose a framework:", ["React", "Vue", "Angular"])

# With descriptions and values
options = [
    {"label": "React", "value": "react", "description": "A JavaScript library"},
    {"label": "Vue", "value": "vue", "description": "The Progressive JavaScript Framework"},
    {"label": "Angular", "value": "angular", "description": "Platform for building mobile and desktop apps"}
]
choice = cc.select("Choose a framework:", options)
```

### Multi-Select Menu

```python
# Multiple selections with constraints
choices = cc.multi_select(
    "Select features to enable:", 
    ["Authentication", "Database", "Caching", "Queue", "Monitoring"],
    min_selection=1,
    max_selection=3
)
```

**Navigation:**

- ↑/↓: Navigate options
- Enter: Select/Submit
- Space: Toggle (multi-select only)
- q/Ctrl+C: Cancel

**Features:**

- Clean vertical navigation without screen clearing
- Automatic fallback to numbered input on non-interactive terminals
- Real-time visual feedback
- Proper cleanup - no leftover display artifacts

## Examples

Run the interactive example menu:

```bash
python examples/menu.py
```

Or explore individual examples:

### Basics

- `basics/hello_world.py` - Simple introduction
- `basics/all_components.py` - Tour of all components

### Feature

- `features/interactive.py` - Arrow-key selection and checkboxes
- `features/spinners.py` - Disappearing spinner functionality
- `features/themes.py` - Custom themes (emoji, minimal, matrix)

### Advanced

- `advanced/full_app.py` - Complete application showcase

### Hello World

```python
import clicycle as cc
import time

# Build a simple CLI
cc.header("My App", "v1.0.0")
cc.info("Processing data...")

with cc.spinner("Loading..."):
    time.sleep(2)
    
cc.success("Complete!")
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Score": 95}, {"Name": "Bob", "Score": 87}])
```

## Bundling with PyInstaller

See [docs/PYINSTALLER.md](docs/PYINSTALLER.md) for instructions on bundling Clicycle apps with PyInstaller.

## Coming Soon

### v3.2 - Theme Presets

- **DefaultTheme**: Balanced, professional appearance
- **CompactTheme**: Minimal spacing for dense output
- **ColorfulTheme**: Vibrant colors and icons
- **MonochromeTheme**: No colors, perfect for logs

### v3.3 - Enhanced Components

- **Panel/Card Component**: Boxed content with borders and padding
- **Tree Component**: Hierarchical data display (file trees, org charts)

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Add cc.text() for plain text without icon
- Add Text component for plain text display (no icon prefix)
- Rename base class from Text to Message for clarity
- Update tests, examples, and docs
- Version bump to 3.2.0

README.md, after:

# Clicycle

[![CI](https://github.com/Living-Content/clicycle/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Living-Content/clicycle/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/Living-Content/clicycle/graph/badge.svg?token=YOUR_TOKEN)](https://codecov.io/gh/Living-Content/clicycle)
[![PyPI version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/clicycle)](https://pypi.org/project/clicycle/)
[![Python Versions](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%20%7C%203.12-blue)](https://pypi.org/project/clicycle/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

> Component-based CLI rendering with automatic spacing and Rich styling

**Clicycle** makes beautiful CLIs easy by treating terminal output as composable components.

## Installation

```bash
pip install clicycle
```

## Quick Start

```python
import clicycle as cc
import time

# Display header
cc.header("My App", "v2.0.0")

# Show messages
cc.info("Starting process...")

# Use a spinner
with cc.spinner("Processing..."):
    time.sleep(2)

cc.success("Complete!")
```

## API Reference

### Display Functions

```python
# Text messages
cc.info("Information message")
cc.success("Operation successful")
cc.error("Something went wrong")
cc.warning("Be careful")
cc.text("Plain text without icon")
cc.list_item("Bullet point")
```

### Plain Text

Use `cc.text()` when you need styled text without a status icon. This is useful for labels, headers within sections, or any text that doesn't indicate a status. It uses the same styling as `cc.info()` but without the icon prefix.

```python
# Label tables or data sections
cc.text("Remote")
cc.table(remote_data)
cc.text("Local")
cc.table(local_data)

# Display paragraphs or descriptive text
cc.text("This command will sync your local configuration with the remote server. Any changes made locally will be uploaded, and any remote changes will be pulled down. Make sure you have saved your work before proceeding.")
```

```python
# Structure
cc.header("Title", "Subtitle", "App Name")
cc.section("Section Name")

# Data display
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Age": 30}], title="Users")
cc.table(data, column_widths={"ID": 40, "Name": 20}, wrap_text=False)
cc.code("print('hello')", language="python", title="Example")
cc.json({"key": "value"}, title="Config")

# Progress indicators (context managers)
with cc.spinner("Loading..."):
    # Your code here
    pass

with cc.progress("Processing") as prog:
    for i in range(100):
        prog.update(i, f"Item {i}")

# Multi-task progress tracking
with cc.multi_progress("Processing tasks") as progress:
    task1 = progress.add_task("Download", total=100)
    task2 = progress.add_task("Process", total=100)
    
    for i in range(100):
        progress.update(task1, advance=1)
        progress.update(task2, advance=1)

# Interactive components (with automatic fallback)
selected = cc.select("Choose an option", ["Option 1", "Option 2", "Option 3"])
selected_many = cc.multi_select("Select features", ["Auth", "API", "Cache", "Queue"])

# Group components without spacing
with cc.group():
    cc.info("These lines")
    cc.success("appear together")
    cc.warning("without spacing")
```

### Table Options

The `table` function supports advanced formatting options:

```python
# Basic table
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Age": 30}])

# Table with title
cc.table(data, title="User List")

# Table with custom column widths (in characters)
cc.table(data, column_widths={"ID": 40, "Name": 20, "Description": 60})

# Table with text wrapping control
cc.table(data, wrap_text=True)   # Allow text wrapping (default)
cc.table(data, wrap_text=False)  # Use ellipsis for long text

# Combined options
cc.table(
    data,
    title="Project Status",
    column_widths={"Project ID": 40, "Status": 15},
    wrap_text=False
)
```

### Configuration

```python
# Configure the default instance
cc.configure(
    width=100,
    theme=cc.Theme(
        disappearing_spinners=True,  # Spinners vanish when done
        spinner_type="dots2"         # Rich spinner style
    ),
    app_name="MyApp"
)

# Direct access
cc.console.print("Rich console access")
cc.theme.icons.success = "✅"
cc.clear()  # Clear screen
```

## Debug Messages and Logging

For debug messages, use Python's standard logging module:

```python
import logging

# Configure logging level based on command line flag
if '--debug' in sys.argv:
    logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)
else:
    logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

# Use standard logging for debug messages
logger.debug("This only appears when logging level is DEBUG")
cc.info("This always appears")
```

## Themes

Create custom themes to control appearance:

```python
from clicycle import Theme, Icons, Typography

theme = Theme(
    # Custom icons
    icons=Icons(
        success="✅",
        error="❌",
        warning="⚠️",
        info="ℹ️",
    ),
    
    # Custom styles (Rich format)
    typography=Typography(
        header_style="bold cyan",
        success_style="bold green",
        error_style="bold red",
    ),
    
    # Spinner configuration
    disappearing_spinners=True,
    spinner_type="dots2"  # dots, line, star, etc.
)

cc.configure(theme=theme)
```

## Component Architecture

For advanced use cases, work directly with components:

```python
from clicycle import Clicycle
from clicycle.components.header import Header
from clicycle.components.spinner import Spinner

# Create instance
cli = Clicycle()

# Render components
cli.stream.render(Header(cli.theme, "Title"))

# Components manage their own spacing
spinner = Spinner(cli.theme, "Loading...", cli.console)
cli.stream.render(spinner)
with spinner:
    # Your code
    pass
```

## Key Features

- **Automatic Spacing**: Components intelligently manage spacing based on context
- **Disappearing Spinners**: Spinners that completely vanish after completion
- **Interactive Components**: Arrow-key navigation with automatic fallback
- **Rich Integration**: Full support for Rich styling and formatting  
- **Component Discovery**: Convenience API automatically discovers all components
- **Type Safe**: Full type hints for IDE support

## Interactive Components

Clicycle provides smooth, responsive interactive components with vertical arrow-key navigation:

### Select Menu

```python
# Simple selection
choice = cc.select("Choose a framework:", ["React", "Vue", "Angular"])

# With descriptions and values
options = [
    {"label": "React", "value": "react", "description": "A JavaScript library"},
    {"label": "Vue", "value": "vue", "description": "The Progressive JavaScript Framework"},
    {"label": "Angular", "value": "angular", "description": "Platform for building mobile and desktop apps"}
]
choice = cc.select("Choose a framework:", options)
```

### Multi-Select Menu

```python
# Multiple selections with constraints
choices = cc.multi_select(
    "Select features to enable:", 
    ["Authentication", "Database", "Caching", "Queue", "Monitoring"],
    min_selection=1,
    max_selection=3
)
```

**Navigation:**

- ↑/↓: Navigate options
- Enter: Select/Submit
- Space: Toggle (multi-select only)
- q/Ctrl+C: Cancel

**Features:**

- Clean vertical navigation without screen clearing
- Automatic fallback to numbered input on non-interactive terminals
- Real-time visual feedback
- Proper cleanup - no leftover display artifacts

## Examples

Run the interactive example menu:

```bash
python examples/menu.py
```

Or explore individual examples:

### Basics

- `basics/hello_world.py` - Simple introduction
- `basics/all_components.py` - Tour of all components

### Feature

- `features/interactive.py` - Arrow-key selection and checkboxes
- `features/spinners.py` - Disappearing spinner functionality
- `features/themes.py` - Custom themes (emoji, minimal, matrix)

### Advanced

- `advanced/full_app.py` - Complete application showcase

### Hello World

```python
import clicycle as cc
import time

# Build a simple CLI
cc.header("My App", "v1.0.0")
cc.info("Processing data...")

with cc.spinner("Loading..."):
    time.sleep(2)
    
cc.success("Complete!")
cc.table([{"Name": "Alice", "Score": 95}, {"Name": "Bob", "Score": 87}])
```

## Bundling with PyInstaller

See [docs/PYINSTALLER.md](docs/PYINSTALLER.md) for instructions on bundling Clicycle apps with PyInstaller.

## Coming Soon

### v3.2 - Theme Presets

- **DefaultTheme**: Balanced, professional appearance
- **CompactTheme**: Minimal spacing for dense output
- **ColorfulTheme**: Vibrant colors and icons
- **MonochromeTheme**: No colors, perfect for logs

### v3.3 - Enhanced Components

- **Panel/Card Component**: Boxed content with borders and padding
- **Tree Component**: Hierarchical data display (file trees, org charts)

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.
